# MicroJava Compiler and Virtual Machine
A lightweight compiler and virtual machine implementation for the MicroJava programming language.

---
## Overview
***MicroJava*** is a simplified, Java-like programming language designed for educational purposes.

This project provides:
- A ***compiler*** that translates MicroJava source code into bytecode (implemented in [`src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1`](src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1) directory)
- A stack-based ***virtual machine*** that executes the generated bytecode (implemented in [`lib/mj-runtime-1.1.jar`](lib/mj-runtime-1.1.jar) file)

---
## Features
- Lexical, syntax, and semantic analysis
- Detailed detection and reporting of compilation errors
- Bytecode generation
- Stack-based virtual machine execution

---
## Compilation Process
The compiler processes MicroJava programs in four stages:
1. ***Lexical Analysis***: Tokenizes the source code.
    - All valid tokens can be found in this file: [`src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/lexical_analysis/lexer.flex`](src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/lexical_analysis/lexer.flex)
    - After building the project, lexer that performs the tokenization will be in this file: `src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/lexical_analysis/generated/Yylex.java`
2. ***Syntax Analysis***: Parses the token stream to build a syntax tree.
    - Grammar specification can be found in this file: [`src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/syntax_analysis/parser.cup`](src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/syntax_analysis/parser.cup)
    - After building the project, parser that performs the parsing of the token stream will be in this file: `src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/syntax_analysis/generated/Parser.java`
    - Also, after building the project, all the classes that represent the nodes of the syntax tree will be in this directory: `src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/syntax_analysis/generated/ast`
3. ***Semantic Analysis***: Checks for semantic correctness and builds a symbol table.
    - Main logic for semantic analysis can be found in this file: [`src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/semantic_analysis/SemanticAnalyzer.java`](src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/semantic_analysis/SemanticAnalyzer.java)
4. ***Code Generation***: Produces bytecode that can be executed by the virtual machine.
    - Main logic for code generation can be found in this file: [`src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/code_generation/CodeGenerator.java`](src/rs/ac/bg/etf/pp1/code_generation/CodeGenerator.java)

---
## Getting Started

### Initial Setup
1. Install Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.8 (for the following setup steps, let's assume your installation directory path is `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-1.8`).
2. Set the `JAVA_HOME` system environment variable to point to the JDK installation directory (`C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-1.8` in our example). 
3. Add the `bin` directory of the JDK to your `Path` system environment variable (`C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-1.8\bin` in our example).
4. Make sure that the added path to the `bin` directory (`C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-1.8\bin` in our example) is the first in the `Path` variable, so that it takes precedence over any other Java installations on your system 
(there is, for example, `Move Up` button in the Windows UI when you open the `Path` system environment variable for editing - select the added `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk-1.8\bin` path
and click this button until this path is at the top).
5. Verify the installation of the Java runtime by opening a terminal and running:
   ```bash
   java -version
   ```
   You should see an output similar to this:
    ```plaintext
    java version "1.8.0_xx"
    Java(TM) SE Runtime Environment (build 1.8.0_xx-bxx)
    Java HotSpot(TM) 64-Bit Server VM (build xx.xx-bxx, mixed mode)
    ```
   > Note: `xx` represents the specific update/build number of the JDK. Any 1.8 version is fine.
6. Verify the installation of the Java compiler by opening a terminal and running:
   ```bash
   javac -version
   ```
   You should see an output similar to this:
    ```plaintext
    javac 1.8.0_xx
    ```
   > Note: `xx` represents the specific update/build number of the JDK. Any 1.8 version is fine.

### Compile and Run MicroJava Programs (Option 1):

1. Download the latest `microjava_compiler.jar` file [here](https://github.com/PavleSarenac/MicroJava_Compiler/releases/latest/download/microjava_compiler.jar).
2. Open a terminal and navigate to the directory where you downloaded the `microjava_compiler.jar` file.
3. Run:
   ```bash
   java -jar microjava_compiler.jar --program [program_path] --input [input_path] --output [output_path] [commands]
   ```
   > Note: All paths are mandatory, `--build` command is mandatory, while `--disasm`, `--debug`, and `--run` commands are optional.
    - `[program_path]`: here you must specify the path to the MicroJava source code file (e.g., `"C:\Users\MyName\microjava_program.mj"`).
    - `[input_path]`: here you must specify the path to the input file that will be used by the MicroJava program during execution (e.g., `"C:\Users\MyName\input.txt"`).
    - `[output_path]`: here you must specify the path to the output directory where the compiled MicroJava program should be placed (e.g., `"C:\Users\MyName"`).
    - `[commands]`: here you must specify the commands (separated by space) that should be executed by the compiler or virtual machine (e.g., `--build --disasm --debug --run`).

### Compile and Run MicroJava Programs (Option 2):

1. Open a terminal and clone the repository:
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/PavleSarenac/MicroJava_Compiler.git
   ```
2. Navigate to the project directory:
   ```bash
   cd MicroJava_Compiler
   ```
3. Build:
   ```bash
   .\scripts\rebuild_microjava_compiler.ps1
   ```
4. Run (you will be prompted to enter all the necessary paths and commands):
   ```bash
   .\scripts\run_microjava_compiler.ps1
   ```
    > Note: All paths are mandatory, `--build` command is mandatory, while `--disasm`, `--debug`, and `--run` commands are optional.

### Commands:
- `--build`: this command tells the compiler to compile the specified MicroJava program.
- `--disasm`: this command tells the virtual machine to disassemble the generated bytecode, allowing you to see all instructions.
- `--debug`: this command tells the virtual machine to execute the MicroJava program in debug mode, allowing you to see all executed instructions along with states of the expression stack after each executed instruction.
- `--run`: this command tells the virtual machine to execute the MicroJava program regularly, without any additional information.

---
## Examples
- Example input files are available in the [`tests/official_tests/inputs`](tests/official_tests/inputs) directory.
- Example MicroJava programs are available in the [`tests/official_tests/microjava_programs`](tests/official_tests/microjava_programs) directory.

---
## Limitations
- Maximum of 256 local variables per method
- Maximum of 65,536 global variables
- Maximum of 65,536 class fields
- Maximum source code size: 8 KB

---
## License
This project is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE).